# ICM: An implementation of a Little-Endian Integer Counter Mode

## Description:
The ICM Counter mode generates a key-stream by encrypting successive values of an incrementing Little Endian ordered, 64bit integer counter array. 
The key-stream is then XOR'd with the input message block creating a type of stream cipher. 
The ICM counter mode differs from the standard CTR mode by using a little endian byte ordered counter, allowing the use of 64 bit integers in the counter array on an LE based architecture (e.g AMD, Intel). 
The trend in processors is moving towards little endian format, and with devices that use this bit ordering, ICM can be significantly faster then the standard big endian CTR implementation. 
In parallel mode, the ICM modes counter is increased by a number factored from the number of message blocks (ParallelBlockSize), allowing for counter pre-calculation and multi-threaded processing. 
The implementation is further parallelized by constructing a 'staggered' counter array, and processing large sub-blocks using AVX, AVX2, or AVX512 SIMD instructions.

The transformation function of the ICM mode is not limited by a dependency chain; this mode can be both SIMD pipelined and multi-threaded. Output from the parallelized functions aligns with the output from a standard sequential ICM implementation. 
This is achieved by pre-calculating the counters positional offset over multiple 'chunks' of key-stream, which are then generated independently across threads. 
The key stream generated by encrypting the counter array(s), is used as a source of random, and XOR'd with the message input to produce the cipher text.

## Implementation Notes
* In ICM mode, Encryption/Decryption can both be pipelined (AVX, AVX2, or AVX512), and multi-threaded. 
* A cipher mode constructor can either be initialized with a block-cipher instance, or using the block ciphers enumeration name. 
* A block-cipher instance created using the enumeration constructor, is automatically deleted when the class is destroyed. 
* The class functions are virtual, and can be accessed from an ICipherMode instance. 
* The EncryptBlock function can only be accessed through the class instance. 
* The transformation methods can not be called until the Initialize(bool, ISymmetricKey) function has been called. 
* If the system supports Parallel processing, and IsParallel() is set to true; passing an input block of ParallelBlockSize() to the transform will be auto parallelized. 
* The ParallelThreadsMax() property is used as the thread count in the parallel loop; this must be an even number no greater than the number of processer cores on the system. 
* ParallelBlockSize() is calculated automatically based on the processor(s) L1 data cache size, this property can be user defined, and must be evenly divisible by ParallelMinimumSize(). 
* The ParallelBlockSize(), IsParallel(), and ParallelThreadsMax() accessors, can be changed through the ParallelProfile() property; parallel processing can be disabled by setting IsParallel() to false in the ParallelProfile() accessor. 

## Example
```cpp
#include "ICM.h"

ICM cipher(BlockCiphers::AES);
// initialize for encryption
cipher.Initialize(true, SymmetricKey(Key, Nonce));
// encrypt one block
cipher.EncryptBlock(Input, 0, Output, 0);
```
       
## Public Member Functions
```cpp
ICM(const ICM&)=delete
```
Copy constructor: copy is restricted, this function has been deleted.

```cpp
ICM &operator= (const ICM&)=delete
```
Copy operator: copy is restricted, this function has been deleted.

```cpp
ICM()=delete
```
Default constructor: default is restricted, this function has been deleted.

```cpp
ICM(BlockCiphers CipherType)
```
Initialize the Cipher Mode using a block-cipher type name.
 
```cpp
ICM(IBlockCipher* Cipher)
```
Initialize the Cipher Mode using a block-cipher instance.
 
```cpp
~ICM() override
```
Destructor: finalize this class.

```cpp
const size_t BlockSize() override
```
Read Only: The ciphers internal block-size in bytes.

```cpp
const BlockCiphers CipherType() override
```
Read Only: The block ciphers enumeration type name.

```cpp
IBlockCipher* Engine() override
```
Read Only: A pointer to the underlying block-cipher instance.

```cpp
const CipherModes Enumeral() override
```
Read Only: The cipher modes enumeration type name.

```cpp
const bool IsEncryption() override
```
Read Only: The operation mode, returns true if initialized for encryption, false for decryption.

```cpp
const bool IsInitialized() override
```
Read Only: The block-cipher mode has been keyed and is ready to transform data.

```cpp
const bool IsParallel() override
```
Read Only: Processor parallelization availability.

```cpp
const std::vector<SymmetricKeySize> &LegalKeySizes() override
```
Read Only: A vector of allowed cipher-mode input key byte-sizes.

```cpp
const std::string Name() override
```
Read Only: The cipher-modes formal class name.

```cpp
const size_t ParallelBlockSize() override
```
Read Only: Parallel block size; the byte-size of the input/output data arrays passed to a transform that trigger parallel processing.

```cpp
ParallelOptions &ParallelProfile() override
```
Read/Write: Contains parallel and SIMD capability flags and sizes.

```cpp
void DecryptBlock(const std::vector<byte> &Input, std::vector<byte> &Output) override
```
Decrypt a single block of bytes.

```cpp
void DecryptBlock(const std::vector<byte> &Input, const size_t InOffset, std::vector<byte> &Output, const size_t OutOffset) override
```
Decrypt a block of bytes with offset parameters.

```cpp
void EncryptBlock(const std::vector<byte> &Input, std::vector<byte> &Output) override
```
Encrypt a single block of bytes.

```cpp
void EncryptBlock(const std::vector<byte> &Input, const size_t InOffset, std::vector<byte> &Output, const size_t OutOffset) override
```
Encrypt a block of bytes using offset parameters.

```cpp
void Initialize(bool Encryption, ISymmetricKey &Parameters) override
```
Initialize the cipher-mode instance.

```cpp
void ParallelMaxDegree(size_t Degree) override
```
Set the maximum number of threads allocated when using multi-threaded processing.

```cpp
void Transform(const std::vector<byte> &Input, const size_t InOffset, std::vector<byte> &Output, const size_t OutOffset, const size_t Length) override
```
Transform a length of bytes with offset parameters.

## Links
NIST [SP800-38A](http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-38a/sp800-38a.pdf). 
Handbook of Applied Cryptography Chapter 7: [Block Ciphers](http://cacr.uwaterloo.ca/hac/about/chap7.pdf). 

