# An implementation of an HMAC Counter Generator DRBG: HCG

## Overview: 
The HMAC based generator uses a hash function in a keyed HMAC to generate pseudo-random output. 
The HMAC is initialized with the input key, when an entropy provider is specified, at intervals of ReseedThreshold,an internal key strengthening/derivation function extracts a key equal to the underlying hash functions internal block size, this is the most secure key-size when generating pseudo-random using an HMAC. 

The key derivation function takes as input the next unused pseudo-random state, which is finalized and added to the second half of the new key, and new entropy from the random provider, is used to populate the first half of the key. 
The generator function uses the HMAC to process a state counter, (which can be set at initialization with the key containers Nonce parameter, or as a zeroed array of 8 bytes), the distribution code which consist of the library name, the classes formal name and security strength, (an optional info parameter can also be added to this using the Info parameter of the initialization key), and the current HMAC finalized state.. The Info parameter of the initialization key can be used as a secondary, static source of entropy used by the generate function, making this similar to an HKDF construction, (HCG uses an 8 byte counter instead of 1 byte used by HKDF, but otherwise the operation is nearly identical). The generator copies the HMAC finalized output to the internal state, and then to functions output array as requested. The pseudo-random state array is processed as seed material in the next iteration of the generation cycle, along with the counter and distribution code, in a continuous transformation process. 

The state counter can be initialized by the Nonce parameter of the Initialize function to an 8 byte secret and random value, (this is strongly recommended). 

The reseed-requests counter is incremented by the number of bytes processed by a generation call, if this value exceeds the ReseedThreshold value (100MB by default), the generator finalizes the state (not added to output), and uses that state, along with the entropy provider, to create a new HMAC key. 
The HMAC is then re-keyed, the reseed-requests counter is reset, and a new initial state is generated by the entropy provider for the next generation cycle.

## Initialization and Update: 
The Initialize functions have three different parameter options: the Key which is the primary key, the Nonce used to initialize the internal state-counter, and the Info which is used by the Generate function to pass a complete block to the HMAC update function. 
The Key value must be one of the LegalKeySizes() in length, and must be a secret and random value. 
The eight byte (NonceSize) Nonce value is another secret value, used to initialize the internal state counter to a non-zero random value. 
The Info parameter maps to the DistributionCode() property, and is used as message state when generating the pseudo-random output. 
The Info is recommended, and for best security, should be secret, random, and should be no more than 20 bytes in length 
The Update function uses the seed value to re-key the HMAC via the internal key derivation function. 
The update functions Key parameter, must be a random seed value equal in length to the seed used to initialize the generator.

## Predictive Resistance: 
Predictive and backtracking resistance prevent an attacker who has gained knowledge of generator state at some time from predicting future or previous outputs from the generator. 
The optional resistance mechanism uses an entropy provider to add seed material to the generator, this new seed material is passed through the derivation function along with the current state, the output hash is used to reseed the generator. 
The default interval at which this reseeding occurs is 1000 times the digest output size in bytes, but can be set using the ReseedThreshold() property; once this number of bytes or greater has been generated, the seed is regenerated. 
Predictive resistance is strongly recommended when producing large amounts of pseudo-random (10kb or greater).

## Implementation Notes: 
* This implementation only supports the SHA2-256 and SHA2-512 message digests.
* The class constructor can either be initialized with message digest and entropy provider instances, or using the Digests and Providers enumeration names. 
* Digest and provider instances created using the enumeration constructor, are automatically deleted when the class is destroyed. 
* The generator can be initialized with either a SymmetricKey key container class, or with a Key and optional inputs of Nonce and Info. 
* The LegalKeySizes() property contains a list of the supported seed input sizes. 
* There are three legal seed sizes; the first (smallest) is the minimum required key size, the second the recommended size, and the third is maximum security. 
* Initializing with a Nonce is recommended; the nonce value must be random, secret, and 8 bytes in length. 
* The Info value (DistributionCode) is also recommended; for best security, this value should be secret, random, and DistributionCodeMax() in length. 
* The Generate() methods can not be used until an Initialize() function has been called, and the generator is seeded. 
* The Update() method requires a Key of length equal to the seed used to initialize the generator. 

## Example
```cpp

#include "HCG.h"

HCG rnd(Digests::SHA512, [Providers::ACP]);
// initialize
rnd.Initialize(Key, [Nonce], [Info]);
// generate bytes
rnd.Generate(Output, [Offset], [Size]);
```
       
## Public Member Functions

```cpp
HCG(const CSG&)=delete
```
Copy constructor: copy is restricted, this function has been deleted

```cpp
HCG& operator=(const HCG&)=delete
```
Copy operator: copy is restricted, this function has been deleted
 
```cpp
HCG()=delete
```
Default constructor: default constructor is restricted, this function has been deleted

```cpp
HCG (SHA2Digests DigestType, Providers ProviderType=Providers::ACP)
```
Instantiate the class using aN SHA2 digest mode, and an optional entropy source type names

```cpp
HCG(IDigest *Digest, IProvider *Provider=nullptr)
```
Instantiate the class using a digest instance, and an optional entropy source
 
```cpp
~HCG() override
```
Destructor: finalize this class

```cpp
const bool IsInitialized() override
```
Read Only: The generator is ready to produce pseudo-random

```cpp
size_t &ReseedThreshold() override
```
Read/Write: The maximum output generated before automatic auto-seed generation when using an entropy provider

```cpp
const size_t SecurityStrength() override
```
Read Only: The estimated classical security strength in bits

```cpp
void Generate(std::vector<byte> &Output) override
```
Fill a standard vector with pseudo-random bytes

```cpp
void Generate(SecureVector<byte> &Output) override
```
Fill a secure vector with pseudo-random bytes

```cpp
void Generate(std::vector<byte> &Output, size_t OutOffset, size_t Length) override
```
Fill a standard vector with pseudo-random bytes using offset and length parameters

```cpp
void Generate(SecureVector<byte> &Output, size_t OutOffset, size_t Length) override
```
Fill a secure vector with pseudo-random bytes using offset and length parameters

```cpp
void Initialize(ISymmetricKey &Parameters) override
```
Initialize the generator with an ISymmetricKey container, containing the key and nonce, and optional info string

```cpp
void Update(const std::vector<byte> &Key) override
```
Update the generators seed value

```cpp
void Update(const SecureVector<byte> &Key) override
```
Update the generators keying material with a secure vector key

## Links
* [NIST SP800-90B](http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/800-90/draft-sp800-90b.pdf): Recommendation for the Entropy Sources Used for Random Bit Generation. 
* [NIST Fips 140-2](http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips140-2/fips1402.pdf): Security Requirments For Cryptographic Modules. 
* [NIST Security Bounds](http://eprint.iacr.org/2006/379.pdf) for the Codebook-based: Deterministic Random Bit Generator. 
