# Poly1305

## Description:
Poly1305 is a Message Authentication Code generator that return a 16-byte authentication code for a message of any length. 
This variant uses a a 32-byte secret key to generate an authentication code along with each encrypted message segment.

## Implementation Notes: 
* The generator must be initialized with a key using the Initialize function before output can be generated. 
* The Initialize(ISymmetricKey) function can use a SymmetricKey or a SymmetricSecureKey key container class containing the generators keying material. 
* Never reuse a nonce with the Poly1305 Mac, this is insecure and strongly discouraged. 
* MAC return size is 16 bytes, the array can be can be truncated by the caller. 
* The Initialize function requires a fixed key-size of 32 bytes (256 bits) in length. 
* The Compute(Input, Output) method wraps the Update(Input, Offset, Length) and Finalize(Output, Offset) methods and should only be used on small to medium sized data./> 
* The Update(Input, Offset, Length) processes any length of message data, and is used in conjunction with the Finalize(Output, Offset) method, which completes processing and returns the finalized MAC code./> 
* After a finalizer call the MAC must be re-initialized with a new key. 

## Example
```cpp

#include "Poly1305.h"

Poly1305 mac;
SymmetricKey kp(Key);
mac.Initialize(kp);
mac.Update(Input, 0, Input.size());
mac.Finalize(Output, Offset);
```
       
## Public Member Functions

```cpp 
Poly1305(const Poly1305&)=delete 
```
Copy constructor: copy is restricted, this function has been deleted

```cpp 
Poly1305& operator= (const Poly1305&)=delete
```
Copy operator: copy is restricted, this function has been deleted
 
```cpp 
Poly1305()=delete
```
Default constructor: default is restricted, this function has been deleted
 
```cpp 
Poly1305()
```
Initialize this class

```cpp
~Poly1305() override
```
Destructor: finalize this class

```cpp
const bool IsInitialized() override
```
Read Only: The MAC generator is ready to process data More...

```cpp
void Compute(const std::vector<byte> &Input, std::vector<byte> &Output) override
```
Process a vector of bytes and return the MAC code

```cpp
size_t Finalize(std::vector<byte> &Output, size_t OutOffset) override
```
Completes processing and returns the MAC code in a standard vector

```cpp
size_t Finalize(SecureVector<byte> &Output, size_t OutOffset) override
```
Completes processing and returns the MAC code in a secure vector

```cpp
void Initialize(ISymmetricKey &KeyParams) override
```
Initialize the MAC generator with an ISymmetricKey key container

```cpp
void Reset() override
```
Reset internal state to the pre-initialization defaults

```cpp
void Update (const std::vector< byte > &Input, size_t InOffset, size_t Length) override
```
Update the Mac with a length of bytes

## Links

* [Poly1305](https://cr.yp.to/mac.html): A state of the art message-authentication code
   
